# MOOC Dropout Prediction

This project’s second model involves machine learning models trained to predict student dropout based on interaction data in MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). This is an interesting problem due to the drastic rise in interest in MOOCs recently, due to their low cost and easily accessible nature when compared to traditional college education options. However, despite becoming more popular, dropout rates remain extremely high, often exceeding 90%. While there have been numerous models constructed to make similar predictions, this model, created by Vignesh Muthukumar (Muthukumar, 2019) uses a neural network, which achieved good results. 

This model is a strong candidate for explainability for several reasons. First, given the notorious “black box” nature of neural networks, there are few options (apart from explainability methods) that offer easy insight into why the model may classify certain students as likely or unlikely to drop out of the MOOC. Additionally, there can be potentially significant ramifications for these students if they are predicted as likely to drop out, or not – a student flagged as likely to drop out may lose motivation, and the prediction may become a self fulfilling prophecy in cases where the student would have otherwise stayed in the course. On the other hand, a student who is truly at risk of dropping out but not identified as such may fail to be noticed by the instructional staff, due to the large and relatively autonomous nature of MOOCs. These significant stakes call for added scrutiny and insight into models making these predictions. Finally, explainability methods applied to MOOC dropout prediction can offer insight into what features successful and unsuccessful students exhibit. 
